---
title: 'Elsewhere from home: A Reading of Contemporary Grief'
type: essay
date: 17 Mar 2022
note: This essay was originally written for the Asian Cinema Education Course "Film Criticism – Long Written Forms. Film Analysis, Essay and Review" in 2021.
---

In many East Asian cultures, a funeral traditionally consists of a wake at the deceased’s dwelling, followed by a procession of the corpse to the family’s graveyard, the symbolic site of the afterlife. For people outside the immediate family, the dwelling, as the last vestiges of the deceased, then serves as a place for extended family members, friends, and acquaintances to pay a final visit before the dead person figuratively departs to the afterworld. The same house functions differently for the co-inhabiting, immediate family members. They would often take part in elaborate funerary ceremonies conducted right within the physical confines of the home—a site that has borne witness to cherished moments of the family’s everyday life—as a way to grieve and pay respect to the one who has passed.

The primacy of a singular, intimate place of home wanes in modern life. Urbanisation and globalisation facilitate the movement of many East Asians from their hometown to larger cities or overseas in pursuit of economic opportunities. This new pattern of life creates geographically separated places of dwellings across and within generations, giving rise to fragmented sites of memories that disrupt the continuity of a traditional, singular home. In the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, funerary significance of the place of home in traditional East Asian belief systems further retreats to obsolescence. For many, death, as it recedes to isolated hospital wards, is felt at a distance; many of us come to learn of the passing of a beloved family member only through secondhand reporting. What is left is a sense of emptiness: figures leaving our field of vision with no returning, certain snapshots of home suddenly felt amiss with no sensorial justifications for the bodies no longer inhabiting, conversations reduced to monologues, and memories turning into a strictly private, individual relic.

A question can be rightfully posed at this juncture: how can one grieve when the traditional means of grieving situated around the place of home is circumstantially made unavailable? I opine that contemporary East Asian cinema could offer some responses, because the inherently diverse, complex, and evolving nature of East Asian experiences would find a place-based notion of home as a vehicle for grief severely limiting as well. I bring to the table three films: _The Farewell_ (2019), _Coming Home Again_ (2019), and _Dear Ex_ (2018).

Adapted from an autobiographical essay, _Coming Home Again_ follows first-generation Korean-American Chang-rae in his late twenties moving back to his parents’ home to take care of his ailing mother up till her death. Similarly written from life experiences, _The Farewell_ is premised upon an elaborate lie by Chinese-American Billie’s extended family to keep her grandmother, dearly called Nai Nai, in the unknown of the latter’s medical prognosis, all while organising a wedding as a pretext for overseas family members to visit Nai Nai in China. Lastly, _Dear Ex_ is a Taiwanese comedy-drama revolving around the teen Chengxi who follows Jay—the lover of his late father Zhengyuan and with whom Zhengyuan spends the last parts of his life—while running away from his mother Sanlian amid her dispute over the legal status of Jay as Zhengyuan’s insurance beneficiary.

Modern thinkers like Gaston Bachelard and Yi-Fu Tuan write of home as man’s first ontological point of reference that demarcates between the finite, intimate, and familiar place of dwelling here, and the infinite, distant, unknowable external world out there. Childhood memories—the only modality through which one accesses the buried experiences of their first contact with reality—are thus intrinsically linked to home. This view is conveyed consistently across the three films: flashbacks experienced by the protagonists in _Coming Home Again_ and _Dear Ex_ are rendered with a nostalgic air tinted with earthy tones, and Billi of _The Farewell_ could not hold back tears when reminiscing her summers at Nai Nai’s as among her fondest memories.

Humanist geographer Tuan stresses the significance of other dwellers that constitute the intimacy of home: Chang-rae and his mother, Bili and her grandmother, and Chengxi and his father. As such, a way for home to function as a site of grief is by invoking recollections of and with the departed. Most prominently in _Coming Home Again_, Chang-rae returns to the physical enclosure that shelters his upbringing, enabling the domestic interior to be not just bearers of memories but also access points of the past. As he inhabits and performs everyday activities in the icy-cold domestic space of the present, he intermittently travels back to the warm orange-tinted memories of the past that takes place in the same enclosure. The contrast between a nostalgic, contented past and the woes of the present acts as the basis for Chang-rae’s mourning: he grieves for his mother’s hearty Korean dishes that he could not replicate, for the missed opportunities of kindness when dismissing his mother’s request for his help to clarify tax reports, and for all the times he could have spent with her had he not left home for boarding school and college.

The strategy of appealing to a specific place as a site of grief is unviable for Billi. China’s fast urbanisation has displaced people from their original homes; Billi’s grandma similarly has moved to a new dwelling different from what Billi remembers of her childhood. The effect is that the "original home" is relegated to a figment of memories with no foundation in the material present.

The capacity of home to facilitate the process of grieving is further problematised by Dear Ex, where places of intimacy as conceived by the living and the deceased diverge. On the one hand, Chengxi recalls a precious piece of childhood memory taking place at home and involving his father: fumbling into Zhengyuan’s study to chase a miniature toy car, toddler Chengxi is struck by his father whose back radiates an aura of backlit sun rays akin to a Buddha figure, greeting the boy with a benevolent smile. On the other hand, Zhengyuan made a conscious decision to move in with Jay after learning of his illness. This act implies that Zhengyuan regards to be by Jay’s side, rather than his wife and son, is to be “at home,” invoking Tuan’s characterisation of intimate spaces as where one lets down their guards to be vulnerable and cared for. Chengxi therefore faces up to the contradiction between his own customary understanding of the relations with his father as illuminated by his childhood memory forged in his presumed home, and the more recent fact that Zhengyuan loves and lives with a seeming stranger at the end of his life.

Even with a material place that anchors memories like in _Coming Home Again_, Chang-rae only returns to his childhood home temporarily to care for his mother till her death. While it would be erroneous to make any prescriptive claims, bounding the operation of grief to a specific place limits one from continuing mourning or making sense of the passing of the dear family member when at a geographical distance, as in the case of Chang-rae resuming his professional life in another city and Billi returning to America. Any attempts to address this shortcoming would prove relevant too in the age of the pandemic where social distancing is a maxim.

_The Farewell_ provides us some preliminary findings on a site of grief other than home, precisely because the supposed original place of intimacy no longer exists. Stylistically, the film makes no use of flashbacks. This is critical in that such a filmic device would misleadingly portray home for Billi as rooted in a material house. The treatment of the physical place of dwelling in _The Farewell_ is thus more mechanical than emotive, evident in the lack of profound human attachments to any material dwellings. This strategy serves to shine the spotlight on the affecting interpersonal relations, be it the several family meals where hearty conversations and playful games take place or Billi joining Nai Nai for some amusing morning exercises. Billi does grieve for the past that she could no longer access, but she also mourns for the present—intimate moments between family members, actively and urgently made—that instantaneously turns memories by the passage of time. The logic of cinema helps to convey this operation of mourning: any film frame dies immediately after its twenty-fourth-a-second life, lingering only as an afterimage and at most of the viewer’s memories.

Dear Ex, in a similar spirit as _The Farewell_, makes attempts to address its aforementioned conflicting places of home. The contradiction leads Chengxi to insistently follow Jay to theatre rehearsals and temporarily stay in the latter’s apartment. The very act of inhabiting, specifically in the same space in which his father dwells before his death, functions in a manner analogous to attending a wake, in that the teen could be in the closest proximity with his father’s lived existence. Through the process, Chengxi discovers that Jay took care of his father in ill health and went all ends to finance the costly treatments. The revelation, aided by Zhengyuan's letter to Chengxi, would dawn on the teen the duality of home for his father so that Chengxi’s cherished memories need not wrestle with any competing forces but are recollected in peaceful conjunction.

The significance of actions taken in the present, either as active memory making or as key to unravelling convoluted remains of the departed, lies in transforming the past into more stable and lasting keepsakes for the living. This idea finds theoretical articulation by Tuan in the chapter "Intimate Experiences of Place" of his book _Space and Place_. He briefly suggests that, beyond modalities like architectural elements of the house, images, music, and language, thoughtful reflection, while lacking in immediacy, transplants “elusive moments of the past” to the present, through which memories of intimate experiences “gain a measure of permanence.”

My view is that such an exercise of the mind is not limited to the written words or mental introspection, but could manifest in any form of meaningful, constructive engagement with the past in the present. As a case in point, the closing sequence of _The Farewell_ sees Billi forcefully shout “ha” while ambling in the middle of a busy street in New York. This action directly reproduces her grandmother’s morning exercise shown earlier in the film. The scene is then cut to the exterior of Nai Nai’s apartment, suggesting that this simple performance of the body lets Billi momentarily connect with her grandma across a vast geographical distance.

Not all recollections of the past are wholly joyous. _Dear Ex_ ends with Sanlian playfully hymning to the melody of her late husband’s composition. She is fully aware of the multivocal nature of the music piece: not only was it soundtracked for a theatrical production from which blossom the romance between Zhengyuan and Jay but it also led Sanlian to Zhengyuan when the latter tried to collect a returned package of wind chimes meant to be used for the same play. As much as the melody reconnects Sanlian with her late husband, it is inevitably a reminder of the love affair that engenders their fallout. Similarly, in _Coming Home Again_, Chang-rae attempts to recreate a family meal on New Year’s Eve, just to be frustrated by his failure to replicate the taste of his mother’s dishes. Food will arguably continue to induce the recalling of Chang-rae’s fond memories with his mother that find no satisfactory replicas in the present. The last scene of the film reaffirms the capacity of remembrance to propagate painful experiences of the past. Sometimes when alone on the road, Chang-rae cannot help but imaginatively see his parents in some car by the roadside. As he wonders what the pair is up to, he returns right back to the image of his mother bursting into tears on his parents’ way back home from visiting him at university. The scars and the pains stay on, intermixing with cherished moments with the departed.

For Bachelard in his study of home, the histories of all previously dwelled houses could imaginatively re-emerge and fuse with the present home when one inhabits and experiences architectural spaces of intimacy. He terms this phenomenon “daylight reverie”. Likewise, repositories of memories with the deceased could be continually brought to the present by turning a resource of the past into acts of doing, seeing, making, thinking, and feeling, all of which are place-independent. A griever could therefore immortalise a fragment of and stay connected to the departed through variously re-animated moments of intimacy, joy, and even heartaches, just for a chance to daydream of coming home again.
